Good day i'm Norman Wildeberger let's have a
look today at trigonometry expressed in terms of
quadrants and spread these are the two concepts
that we've been talking about in the last few
videos and they simplify trigonometry enormous
lee so i remind you that if we have a point its
represented by a pair of rational numbers x and
y and a line is represented by a proportion a to
be to see also of rational numbers the quadrants
between two points a 1 and a 2 is the difference
between the x-coordinates squared plus the
difference in the y-coordinates squared and
the spread between two lines l1 and l2 is given
by this expression in the coordinates a 1 B 1 C
1 and a 2 B 2 C 2 it's a 1 B 2 minus a 2 B 1 all
squared divided by a 1 squared plus B 1 squared
times a 2 squared plus B 2 squared now in a
picture a diagram we may have points a 1 a 2
and a 3 we represent the quadrants --es of the
sides by little bars Q 1 Q 2 and Q 3 so notice
that Q 1 is usually opposite a 1 Q 2 is opposite
a 2 and Q 3 is opposite a 3 and the spreads made
by the pairs of lines are s 1 s 2 and s 3 one
other thing that we need to remember is the
formula for the line joining two points so if we
have a point x1y1 and another point x2y2 then the
line joining them you noted a 1 a 2 is given by
this proportion y 1 minus y 2 2 X 2 minus X 1 2
X 1 y 2 minus X 2 y 1 so when we say the spread
s 1 we really talk about the spread between a
1 and a 2 and a 1 a 3 let's have a look at
a particular example where we can actually
compute the squadron PSA's and spreads for three
particular points so here are three particular
points a 1 is 1 0 a 2 is 3 5 and a 3 equals 4 or
2 so to illustrate how relatively easy it is to
compute with these quantities let's calculate
the quadrants us first the quadrants q1 is the
quadrants between a2 and a3 so we look at the
difference between the x coordinates and we
square it and then we look at the difference
between the Y coordinates and we square that
as well we add them so we have 1 squared plus 3
squared equals 10 similarily q2 is 13 and q3 is
29 to calculate the spreads we first need to
calculate the lines joining these two points
so how do we calculate a1 a2 well we look at
the coordinates for a1 and a2 and we look at
y1 minus y2 that's the first coordinate then
x2 minus x1 that's the second coordinate and
then the last one is the product one times five
minus the product 3 times 0 for total of 5 and
now we can check that this is the line going
through these two points by checking that 1
times minus 5 plus 0 times 2 plus 5 is 0 and that
three times minus 5 plus 5 times 2 plus 5 is also
0 in a similar way I'll let you check that a1 a3
is minus 2 2 3 2 2 and a2 a3 is the line 3 2 1 2
minus 14 and now to calculate the spread s-1 say
which will be the spread between the two lines
going through the point a1 you need to calculate
the spread between these two lines what do we do
this times this minus this times this so that's
minus 15 plus 4 all squared in the numerator in
the denominator five squared plus two squared and
minus two squared plus three squared for a total
of 121 over 29 times 13 which is 121 over 377 in
a similar way s2 you can check is 121 over 290 and
s3 is 121 over 130 now if we had given these
same three points to a classical trigonometry
and asked them to calculate the distances and the
angles and we only gave them a piece of paper and
pen we would be here all day and all week in all
half a year because you can't actually calculate
these angles completely correctly you can only
calculate truncations or approximations to them
and if we say require 10-digit approximations
then by hand even a professional mathematician
would probably require most of a day to find the
angles and the distances for a triangle like this
showing that this system is not only much more
logical but it's also much more practical for
actual calculations and now let's get to the
main laws of trigonometry there are five two
of them we've already talked about it they are
Pythagoras theorem and the triple quad formula
now let's have a look at the other three main
laws of trigonometry the main law is concerned
a general triangle which has quadrants as q1 q2
q3 and spreads s1 s2 s3 as we were talking about
in the previous two slides there are three main
laws the spread law the cross law and the triple
spread formula these are laws that connect these
six numbers to each other the first of the laws
is the spread lights telling us that s1 divided
by q1 equals s 2 divided by q2 equals s 3 divided
by q3 this is the rational analogue of the sine
law does not require any transcendental functions
however only rational arithmetic is required the
next law is the cross law which is probably most
important of all the laws it expresses a spread in
terms of the three other quadrants --is so it's q1
plus q2 minus q3 all squared equals 4 times q1
times q2 times 1 minus s3 and that's all day one
of three possible cross laws you could vary this
by interchanging the indices 1 2 & 3 so you'll
also get a corresponding one with an s2 here and
another one with an s-1 here this is the analog
the rational analog of the cosine law and finally
there's a relationship between the 3 spreads of a
triangle this is called the triple spread formula
and it tells us that the sum s 1 plus s 2 plus s
3 all squared is 2 times the sum of the squares
s 1 squared plus s 2 squared plus s 3 squared
plus an additional cubic term 4 times s 1 s 2 s
3 and this is the rational analogue of the fact
that the sum of 3 angles in a triangle adds up to
that magical number pi with these three laws and
Pythagoras theorem and the triple quad formula
and I remind you that the triple quad formula is
essentially this part of the triple spread formula
so there's a lot of connections between these laws
these five laws allow us to solve the majority of
trigonometric problems that's a big claim and if
you are more interested in seeing how that works I
suggest that you look at my wild trig series also
a youtube series that explains how rational
trigonometry really does change our point of
view to the boards geometry and calculations
how do we prove these laws because after all
we're interested in a purely logical development
of mathematics so we want to make sure that all
of our laws are nailed down completely well that's
actually very easy to do because all of these laws
are purely algebraic expressions and so if we
have three points x1 y1 x2 y2 x3 y3 then it's
purely a matter of labour to convert each one
of these laws into a big identity involving the
little six variables and so you can easily check
these laws if you have a computer just by making
the computer calculate both sides of these
expressions and then verifying that they're
actually the same next time we would have a look
at circles and how to look at them completely
logically and clearly I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening